# The maelstrom Sokoban levels by David Holland

The word Maelstrom means a powerful whirlpool, named after one off the coast of Norway.

Author's note: The collection ranges from the pretty small (5 objects, 8x9 squares) through the mid-sized (13 objects, 15x11 squares) right up to the large (one puzzle with 57 objects 23x24 squares). Just browse for the kind of challenge you like. The puzzles are in rough order of difficulty. I designed the maze layout and goals for all the puzzles, and many but not all of the small puzzles use computer-generated start positions. A few of the puzzles feature unexpected twists within lengthy solutions and require substantial imagination, and the others I hope are at least interesting. A fully-featured Sokoban player (with drag and drop movement of objects, mouse movement of the man, ability to keep your place if you quit and return to the puzzle another time) is strongly recommended for the medium to larger puzzles, though not strictly necessary.

Note on computer-generation of the puzzle maelstrom.16: the first draft was designed without computer help. But the computer found a much shorter solution which didn't use the key idea in my original solution which I had intended. However, it also found a deeper start position (namely maelstrom.16) and a solution for it which DID use the key idea I had found! This shows pretty well the secondary role of a computer generator like my program sokgen: it may not help you if you haven't already play-tested a draft of your puzzle to see that it contains some interesting variations. But if you have found something interesting by play-testing, it can help you by finding an optimal solution and suggesting deeper start positions which may even work better than your originals by "forcing" your intended key positions and variations (in the sense of making them necessary for a push-optimal solution). In this case, it saved me the extra play-testing work that would have been needed to spot that my original solution wasn't optimal and how to change the start position to force the key idea. 

Source: [http://www.clickfest88.freeserve.co.uk/maelstrom/index.html](http://www.clickfest88.freeserve.co.uk/maelstrom/index.html)
